The Pathway

James de Bilmot

************


THE PERSONS

SEAN Ó MATHLUNA farmer

MÁIRE Ó wife

MICHAEL Ó MATHÚNA the youngest son (in custody)
TOMAS the eldest son (who is
officer in the Free State Army )

LOCATION: In rural Kerry. Around 5.30 p.m., an evening
in December 1922.

************


Mary is sitting on a stool by the fire. She is about
fifty years old, thin, quiet and her hair a little gray. She has a black blouse
and a skirt of the same color. An apron on her as well.
The fire is on the left side (inside) of the stage. On one side of it
fire there is a table and two chairs next to it. There is a clock on the table. At the 
back of the stage there is a door with a lock on it. Out, but it can not
be seen, there is a pathway coming down the road, an there are gates, to the
to the door. On the right side of the stage is a room door. Hand with him
that but closer to the front of the stage a dresser is standing and
a chest as a base.

MARY Half past five. I don't know what is keeping him. Of course, he should be home in half an hour
ago. I don't like him to be out late.
I can't stay calm. There is a hole inside my heart
as surely as God exists he came across the
Leaves on the funeral and if it came... There is no way
he controlled his anger.

She walks around. The rumbling of horses and cars is heard
out. She listens and rushes to the door.

MÁIRE Oh, here it is at last. (She opens the door.) Are you
that is there, John?
Seán Ó Mathúna comes here. He is a tall gray man, over sixty years old. He is thin and looks nervous. Yes
he had a few drinks but it would not be said that he was drunk.
He notices the concern of his wife.

JOHN Yes. What is the story? what the hell is wrong with you,
what is the story?

MÁIRE What kept you? I was getting worried.

JOHN Worried, isn't it? Was it because you thought there was something
wrong with me? No, I promise you that. the was not

************


, God know, it will only be so little. I have to leave Polly. (Exits.) Stay calm, Polly
By God, there was not.

MÁIRE There is something wrong with him. I know that. No
I wonder if it's because he met Muintir Dhuilleáin.
Will we ever have peace again in this house or
will we ever have our own Michael at home?
Seán comes in with the horse's harness.

JOHN Well - look at me. 'Is there anything wrong with me? No
— I still have a vein in me, Mary, I tell you that.'

MARY There's something on your mind,

JOHN (In a louder voice) No... I say... no. I am so
good for a man with anyone alive — in this parish — in the 
 world. But give me a drop

His wife goes to the cupboard to get him a drop. He sits himself on
a chair by the table

JOHN Mary, I'm not as young as I used to be after all.
I'm not, Mary.

MÁIRE None of us are getting any younger. Mhuis!

JOHN Look, do you ever think about the land and the farm?

MARY I do not. I care about the opposite.

JEAN (Continuing) Isn't it a thing after all — a thing
It is miraculous — to work in the same spot
where your father and grandfather were toiling
before you, how they made an small things of every big problem

MÁIRE If a person were to work hard not for the likes of that
he would remember.


JOHN I don't know, Thoughts like that push me
often in spite of myself. Sometimes, Mary, and
I'm on the bog drinking a drop of tea, or drawing
old pipe up there at Ardan Bóther and smell
the freshly cut grass around me, I feel the
to have sprites on the whole place. Ah, lady, morning
summer and the sun is a golden cloud in the eastern sky,


************

looking at me on that nine-acre meadow near the
river and it is ripe, ready to harvest, I feel the
same thing.
His wife gives him a drink. He swallows it back. She sits on
free table chair.

JOHN Mary, I know you don't understand me. you were not born and not raised like i was...
I have no life in this world but this farm —
and was not making my poor father sick on his deathbed but I could not do the work of the farm . ... and now finally...

MÁIRE We have no one to help us. The fledgling is at
last gone from the nest — poor Michael — and he
out on his keep somewhere in the mountains. But
will contact Thomas in Dublin and
he will come and settle this matter but... John,
you have some trouble on your mind after the day. Yes, tell me —

JOHN No, lady. Only —

MÁIRE But — what — John?
JEAN No, Mary ... but for God's sake! I'm dying now.

MÁIRE What are you up to, John? For God's sake, tell me.

JOHN (In a rough and hard voice) My own son if he came between me
and that pathway now I would lay without pity without cold moisture
dead on the west there before my eyes.

MARY Calm yourself, sit down.

JOHN I won't sit. .. an apparition appeared to me last night - yes
the ghost of my father and my mother — as if
make your bed in heaven tonight. .. None will come
good luck I thought my poor dead father came inside the 
door and that he took with that old gun that
used to hang on the wall. He was as white as a
shirt. My mother tried to stop him but
she did not succeed. Then she was crying — I woke up then and
beads of sweat on my face. 'Something terrible will happen.


************

MARY It won't happen ..... Don't let those ghosts stop you.
JEAN Bailiffs, bailiffs and bailiffs' family — a man cannot put up
with them and Mathún can do no more than that; but - (De
low voice) — what good is it without help, without
assistance. Ah! God for the days when he had a gun
each —

MARY. Sean! The twist that is playing on your mind again.
Throw it to them and they'll be fine. But wait until the courts are on again.


JOHN Courts, isn't it! Mathúnach was never used
on court and they have no one to thinking to start
now. A court of law for the men went to  Taig Fínín's funeral and tried to
beat me there! ... but, my word to you that a
enough for them. "Get out of the way," said one of them
the two cars collided as we arrived
out on the field. The whip was brought straight across the
neck for him. In a low voice someone said
one of them that they would still find satisfaction...Satisfaction! In the name 
God! I'm too skilled at that game. I can myself
to protect as well as anyone.

MARY But, John, you can't. .. This confrontation is for you
kill and there is pity is not for me. The clothes are at falling off
the bones. A cloud of sleep does not come to my eyes
and your poor daughter Brídin over in England — the poor child
among strangers — he will put an end to that.

JOHN We have no cure for it, Mary. Don't blame me. Blame the
the father and the mother I had. Blame the power
which gave me the sight to see the cows coming
home on a dewy summer morning, and the ears
to be listening to them while they are singing beautifully, softly,
ready, autumn night in quiet pans. Blame the
that power. Don't blame me. Leave me alone on your road
myself in the name of God... Another drop, Mary.

She goes up the room to get it for him.


*********

JOHN (Talking to himself) “Up on the ledge of the gate you find
he... gun drawn on him...

His wife comes and gives him the drink.

MÁIRE Stop, John, and have patience.

JEAN Dar Muire, no one will get a turn from me but over me
cold dead body. Mathewon was not weak-willed
never, nor was there a police visit on his farm. Nobody will stop me. Wife or children, it doesn't matter.

MÁIRE What will they do, John?

JOHN What would you do, wouldn't you? (Slowly) God of Heaven,
I curse you and your collection of the guns
that leaves a person without means of his own protection. But... but
call my son and he will come.

MARY Who is ....? Michael, is it?

JOHN Who else? Is it because I would be calling strangers
taking the road. Of course, it should be here
he would have been shoulder to shoulder with his own father but he wasn't
he could stay with the speeders. They thought so
I would be weakened. Woman .... I feel a strange courage, gay in me
tonight — the Land League spree — and Michael will come.
He will come to the aid of his father. Will come ...
There is a knock on the door and Mícheál Ó Mathúna, a
son, enter. He is equipped like a member of the I.R.A., and
he has a pistol on his belt. His mother kisses him. During opening
next door, the rumble of a lorry is heard. Michael looks back over
his shoulder.

MÁIRE Welcome, my son, to your own home again.

JOHN Where he should be regardless of anyone.

MÁIRE How are you, Michael? You look tired.

MICHAEL I'm a little tired. I have walked a long way.
West in Bally an Sléibhe is where i got your message, Dad.

JOHN And you came here?

MICHAEL Why should I not come? If the parish
black with the Free State army I would come and, by the way, yes

*********
they are around, Listen to that truck. It's not much
from us, Listen! It is ap bolíocht timpe all about as it would be
he strays, Oh yes, the lorry reminds me of him.
We have this Thomas in the army of the Free State,

MARY What! And it hasn't been two weeks since I wrote to him asking
on coming home. (The mother puts the pistol on his belt.)
What's that on your belt? Put it away. put it away,
Mícheál puts it next to the table and his father looks on
sharp on him.

JOHN It's loaded?

MICHAEL Yes.

MÁIRE I'd get you something to eat. Sit down. Not long
what now

She goes up to the room.
MICHAEL Well, Dad, what are you up to?

JOHN The old story, my son. The Leafs are chasing me and
we are strong, and I am getting old. The turn should wear
to give them up and if I do... No
long live. It would break my heart... and on
of course you should. All I have is a pike.

MICHAEL I'm there, Dad.

JOHN I know, my son, but you can't stay and die
alone again from day to day listening to their complaints, and
I am helpless and helpless in this world, and for
mother urging me every day to give it up to them
love is the solution. She doesn't understand the story. Oh, it's terrible
something great about Mathún .... but the great thing was about me
feet and was to give it to them until today.

MICHAEL What fell out today?
JEAN The softness is gone from me; an inch they won't get now.
They insulted me in front of the community at a funeral
Finnin came. They threatened me and...

Goes up to the room where his wife is.

MICHAEL Blood, blood again... Bloodshed and revenge. to
will we ever have the opposite in this country?


*********
JOHN (Comes down from the room with a piece of paper in his hand.)
Look at that... It's on top of the gate rail
who gets it. Read it.

Michael reads it.

JOHN They're getting simple in their heads. Do they think that
I'm a despicable thing without spirit without morale? That work that
stop — that's my business of yours.

The hum of the lorry is heard again. Michael listens to him
own.

MICHAEL That truck is approaching us.

JOHN Don't block the lorry. They bounce around to
often. The Leafs will come tonight after
today's compound. They think I'm in
alone You understand better than I do
how to prevent this. Don't tell them to give up
father He would kill him.

Michael bows his head in his hands.

JOHN Son, can you hear me? You have your way inside the house
this and it is not far from you.

Does not take. Michael none of it.
JOHN Michael, will you read it again? You understand what that means
with him?

MICHAEL (Low) I understand, Dad. Take the situation gently.
I am thinking.

JOHN Thinking, isn't it? That is not why you are informed that
to this house. You are not a Mathew if you do it
prevent this.
The buzzing is heard even closer. Michael raises his head.

MICHAEL Curse that truck! He would not go alone.
I am like a hare that would be on the trail
bogs without rest, without rest. Don't bother me.
Don't you hear that truck? You know but...

JOHN What kind of family do you have anyway? My son there
army and another person should not move himself to...
Mícheál jumps in as if he was going to say he would


*********

He looked at his father, but suddenly when he turned around
his mother's poor voice as she came from the room.

MARY (Softly) Michael.

MICHAEL His mother.

JOHN Alone again — as always. .. a stranger
own house standing on my own...
A cow is heard coughing outside.
MÁIRE Drop out and see Bricks. She is coughing on
throughout the evening. There is something wrong with her. do,
John, I ask you.

We take, he takes down a lantern, lights it and plunges into it
hand it.

MARY A few minutes, John.

JOHN (Roughly) You will, but Michael, when you return

you have your answer for me and I will only ask that it be
answer as it was customary for Mathews.

It goes out. During the opening of the door, a buzz is heard
lorry. Michael raises his head and looks out, that
lost

MICHAEL What would you do, mother? Where to flee from
ansprid revenge this? Thought there would be a truce
I have here.

MÁIRE That's not here, my son.

MICHAEL I'm all tired of this work. In the dead time of
a night that is not terrible to be awake, and a
to listen to the snarling of the boys extended in
beside you as long as your own thoughts are pushing in
you in spite of — some of them sadly, some of them
delightful, but all mixed up together, and oh
heard that Tomás was in the soul, no sleep falls
on my eyes at all but I imagine myself one day
maybe there will be an ambush and that will come
direction... . and that he will recognize me and open up
his eyes and wonder and wonder in them but
when it's his turn to say a word he'll drop dead cold

*********
*********

in front of my eyes... but I have to continue
fight... Help my father...

MÁIRE We won't do it if it's me who has to stop you.
MICHAEL Any place where you put your hand outside the cloth of
bed, she would hit with a gun... God! do not send
that's a crazy person? And then not to be
able to prevent this reflection... It is terrible.

MÁIRE I know it too well.

The sound of bullets is heard outside a while from the house. Runs
Seán Ó Mathúna entered and was very upset.
Máire pulls Michael towards the door of the room.

MARY Oh, God! What is that?

JOHN Here they are in the end... I knew it
they would come tonight. That's my vision come true
... I was sure they would take me down tonight. Now, a
son, you know what your father has to suffer. The was directed
that bullet for me but it failed.

He listens to himself. He moves around the kitchen quickly.
JOHN Son, they're looking for me ... can you hear them? There are at
the gate of the road, I join like a mouse.

(He looks at Michael.)

MÁIRE John, don't bother Michael.

JOHN Son, I'm with you I say...

He cocked the pistol. He jumps to it and takes it.
Prosper. Michael about me dean.

JOHN Druid back, my son. In the name of God, close back! There is a spark
in me tonight I would kill my own son now, back off!
Máire Mícheál draws herself. Seán gives his face
on the door. Footsteps are heard outside. It handles the
pistol trying to learn how to use it.

JOHN Á, á! I have it. I was trained on these a day of my life.
Come now. Seán Ó Mathúna is ready, ready in
before you.
He steps aside but his face is on the door with her
during that time.

*********

I am waiting for you. I'm crazy tonight,
It is heard as if someone is using the environment outside

JOHN Come on. Now we will see who will get the pathway,
You will find it and welcome but you have to fight for it
for

Footsteps are heard outside the door
JOHN, Hurry up, I'm ready before you.
He raises the gun. A hand is placed on the latch. There is the door
being opened. Micheál jumps towards his father and shouts.

MICHAEL for God sake stop!
He tries to raise the gun but it shows up
John shoots a pillar. Someone knocks on the door
Seán runs out shouting


JOHN Come now, One of you has been laid, whatever the case may be.
The mother recognizes her son, Tomás. She runs to him and
with Michael's help, she rises on the, forms that are next to the
fire it. Part of a soldier's uniform can be seen on it, Eiríð
Tomás sighs a little and says weakly, 'Oh, my... mother -
on him,” and he falls, dead.
John entered, with the gun in his hand.

JOHN Now we'll see who will have the turn --

He recognizes his son He shakes from the bottom and:
the gun falls to the ground. He himself falls ... and turns
... a blood stream to his face!
END
