Chunks:
Yellow May Day

Máiréad Ní Grada

*********


THE PERSONS:

NURSE 1

NURSE 2

PEDAR MAC FLANNCHADHA in his old age
PEDAR MAC FLANNCHADHA as a young boy
NÓÍÍN NÍ KATASCHAICH is an old woman

NÓÍÍN NÍ KATHASÍÍ was a young girl
PÁÍD Ó SÉ fer ala in love with Nóinín

YOUNG BOYS, YOUNG GIRLS,
DANCERS AND FIDLERS

SLIMH: The garden in a hospital for the elderly. Day
it's summer. The sun shining. Birds singing.
Two trees on either side of a square: they are covered with foliage.

**************


Nurse 1 enters on the right. A wheelchair being driven in front of them
her. Old man in the chair. Sail across his shoulders. Susa over a
knees He's a very wise man and he's going mad every day
age. It is clear, however, that he was once a talented man. Yes, high
cylindrical His hair is gray, but his eyelashes are thick and thick
still black. The nurse pushes the chair in front of her and settles down
in which she is left. That is a pretty young girl. Vibrant and mature in her own right.
She is quite a good-hearted girl: if, hardness or lack of gentleness is felt in her,
this is due to the needs of her career. The soulfulness is
false in her that accompanies her trade. She talks to the old man
about how she would talk to a child.

NURSE 1 Yes now. Keep yourself happy for now.
You have shade from sun and wind while you are on your goal
summer listening to the music of the birds, without rent, case or
tempt you

OLD MAN Bad luck to them, like birds. They have many calls.
Bad luck to them, I say.

NURSE 1. (Setting the pillow under his head) Now, now, don't
don't be mean.

OLD MAN (Malís children asr, about how a servant would be after
say a bad word) Bad luck to them, I say.

BANALTRA 1 If you're having a bowel movement, you wouldn't put sugar in it
have some tea later, and you won't thank yourself. It should
May you be cheerful and bright today. Don't remember
you what is your day today? Today is your birthday.
'Do you know how old you are?

OLD MAN (Gently) I am eight years and four feet.

NURSE 1. Isn't it good that you know that
precisely! You are very handsome for your age, God bless you!
This now, is it that comfortable?

*********

OLD MAN My pipe. Give me my pipe

NURSE 1 Now, now, isn't it. you know not
you are only allowed to smoke your pipe when
would I be by your side to take care of you? Not
you remember what happened to you last day
when you fell asleep while throwing, do
a pipe in the bed without knowing? You were finished
that day, boy. if I didn't run to you that
fast. Now, now, don't be mad. If you are a
good boy will bring you your pipe too
as soon as you have eaten your dinner and there will be steam
you are at ease.

Banllra 2 enters. Driving another chair in front of her,
Old lady in the chair. This nurse is apparently la
the other nurse, but not so lively as her, Nil
the old woman as wise as the old man, and clearly not
she lacks a spouse. She is military, worn, but hair turned on
the color of silver vapor on her head. Her voice as sweet as a mature voice
a young girl. A visual curse, however, and it is a little
deaf

NURSE 2. (Setting the chair under the tree on the right) Now
to you, isn't this a nice place?

OLD WOMAN It's all beautiful.
BANALTRA 2 You will have a wonderful time here in the garden. Yes
the day is fine.

OLD WOMAN It is wonderful, praise be to God

NURSE 2 Leave you here for half an hour. If
tomorrow is fine again, it will be a little while longer
you in the open air. Half an hour is enough for the first day.

OLD WOMAN I am very grateful to you, dear

OLD MAN My pipe. Give me my pipe

BANALTRA 1 Now, now, dare you not to be cross
Get your Pipe later.
BANALTRA 2 (With the Isanbean) Be a good girl now
return

*******
*********

OLD WOMAN (Laughing at him!) There's no danger of you doing any harm at all
and that is gone from me.

OLD MAN My pipe. Bring me my pipe, I say

NURSES 1 If you have a fever, you will be brought into the house
you again Remember that this is your birthday and that
is eight years and four score.
The two barmaids come to the center of the stage.

NURSE 1 I wouldn't dare give him his pipe, for fear
he would set his clothes on fire, as he did
it's the last day. She recently came here
in?

BANALTRA 2 We have had her here for a month but this is the first day
out of her. We had no hope that she would come out,
but she is recovering well. Poor woman is cute
yes she is She wishes me success in everything I do
to her.

BANALTRA 1. Bad luck is what my husband wishes for me the most. Yes
going mad with old age. (Looks at a
watch) Yes, girl, it's dinner time and not
she herself will thank us if we are late. Let's leave
our young couple here together. There is no risk that they will escape
with each other while we are gone from them.
We go while they laugh. During the following speech,
the old woman speaks as if it were a day she was at
talk The old man is muttering to himself lowly, no
no interest honey. From time to time a word of her speech reads i
affect him and he speaks loudly. She doesn't hear him.

OLD WOMAN. It is a delightful day; praise be to God. Wind and
sun there. They are sweet together
OLD MAN That nurse is bad. She doesn't let me
to smoke a pipe. Bad luck. Bad luck
on her, I say.


OLD WOMAN (Her ear is listening to the song of her bird) That's a voice
the thrush.

OLD MAN Bad luck to them, like birds. They have many calls

**********************

OLD WOMAN I wonder if that's the same thrush that was
chant outside the window at dawn. not
never heard music so sweet.

OLD MAN They have many calls, like birds. They don't let you
old man to sleep.

OLD WOMAN Little white clouds are floating across the sky. Is
they look like sheep's wool.

OLD MAN (Loudly) A woman like a pig, a woman like a hen, a woman
as a sheep. (Laughs.)

OLD WOMAN There is a fair bit of wind. The west wind
it is her.

OLD MAN (Searching through his clothes) Those are bad goods.
She won't let me smoke my pipe. But I am
able to her. I have another pipe without knowing it. (He at
laughing inspection) Where do I have it? (He hangs the pipe
1 pocket the tail of his leg) Hi, hi, hi! I have it.

OLD WOMAN The west wind. She is coming to us from
big sea She is coming to us over hills
and plains, over mountains and over moors.

OLD MAN Smoking. Where to put the tobacco that my son's wife gave
to me the other day?
OLD WOMAN The west wind is blowing over Món a' Lín
today.

OLD MAN OF MOIN A'LÍN. Moin a' Lin.

OLD WOMAN The white head is pacing to and fro
Moin a' Lin today, while the larks sing in the sky
in height.

(Laughing.)
OLD WOMAN A yellow May day.

The teams are working on
Moin a' Lin today. Boys on the slopes. Boys
picking. Girls bringing them dinner

OLD MAN (Trying to scold Jason) Bad luck to them
as matches. They are damp. My son's wife brought them to me
and they are damp.
******





SANBHEAN Young boys and young girls working on the
 bog. sport and bright smiles. The youth thing is fine

OLD MAN He who spends in service is fine, not youth
it. (He is proud to have the old saying exactly and says
he repeated it under his breath.)
As the old woman tells her story in this talk a
follows, the characters she mentions come on the scene and
they imitate what she is saying.
The audience understands that they are not really there but that
so the old woman sees them with her mind's eye.
Soft, sweet music is played throughout the speech.
OLD WOMAN A yellow May day like this is what Pedar Mac saw
First ever flight. (Peter comes
Mac Flanchadha on the scene. He pretends he is at
pick.) It was eighteen years at the time. There was a group
us on the bog. He was a pike man.

OLD MAN (He's got the red pipe by now. He's lying back in it
a chair while enjoying the tobacco) Gibiris
speech! The women only speak gibberish.

OLD WOMAN Neilí Ní Briain and I came to the
stew with dinner. (Two young girls come on the
platform.) Saw Peter MacFlanchadha. My gave
heart delight him. He was bare-headed. The was
The wind plays with the hair
he had to.

OLD MAN Gibberish speaking! Gibberish speech!

OLD WOMAN The heavy wet sods were being thrown away
by him, as if there were no ounce of weight in any head
at them. The boy was very agile that day.

OLD MAN Where there is a woman, there is talk.
OLD WOMAN He raised his head and looked at me. We gave
love each other at first sight. (The boy stretches and
the girl's hands to each other.) Thought that there was no life
at that moment just the two of us — Peter Mac
Flannchadha and Nóinín Ní Chathasaigh.

**************

OLD MAN (Using the Pipe) I'd live without food.
I would not drink. But I wouldn't live without tobacco.

OLD WOMAN The sun is shining. Music of the lark
air. Scissors of the wind in the reeds. Love in the heart of
two of us.

OLD MAN Love, love, love! The disease of love is clinging.
OLD WOMAN When the day's work was over, we walked
home together. The sun is setting in the sky.
Shadows spreading on the grass. The smell of the scythe
brightness in the air. The thrush singing its last tune.
We hand in hand. We are enchanted by the joy of the
evening and the joy of love.

OLD MAN Swanson woman! Swanson women!

OLD WOMAN When we were parting at the
gate, he kissed me. The gates were thought to be the
Heaven had opened to me. Run into the
home as if I had wings.

OLD MAN Scream and talk! Call and talk!

OLD WOMAN There has never been such a summer since
love that summer. Bright sun in the day.
A big yellow moon there at night. Both of us at
walking in the alley under the moonlight, or sitting under it
hawthorn, hand to hand, and mouth to mouth.

OLD MAN He's bad, like a pipe! “I'm exhausted.
(He tries to red the pipe.)

OLD WOMAN It is said that the devil is jealous of people
love He maintains a mischief between them. The. was jealous
hell with me and Peter MacFlanchadha.
It used to be my prick to ban. I was there
light-headedness. He was hot, stubborn.
He doesn't want any other man looking at me
than him laying hands on me. And the devil, the devil
for my prick to make him angry.

MAN The devil, the wall that pricked me!

OLD WOMAN I knew that Páid Ó Sé had an eye on me

**************
after. I was pretending to flirt with him
in order to make Peter jealous.

OLD MAN Jealous, jealous. jealousy and anger!

OLD WOMAN The devil was my prick that evening
at the crossroads.


The lights are gradually changed, so that there is a strong light
on the middle of the stage - the place where the dance will take place - and not
there will be only a dim light on the two old people on both sides.
As the old woman tells the story, the people come
young on stage. They pretend to talk and at
laugh with each other.


OLD WOMAN We had a quarrel the night before —
a confrontation that was not worth a pin. The kind of confrontation is
only happens between two people who are in love.

OLD MAN Confrontation! Jealousy and anger and strife!

OLD WOMAN Duras is a difficult word. with him. A word that tricked him.
He became angry. We were both angry
us parting with each other that night.

OLD MAN Strife and anger and jealousy!

OLD WOMAN There was a dance at the crossroads the next night.
It was a Sunday afternoon. The boys and the
girls meeting with each other. A fiddler making music
to them. (The fiddler comes on stage.) It was sure that
let's do me. My aunt sent it to me from America. There was a ribbon
I have blue under my waist. (The young girl comes to
She started fixing the ribbon around her waist.) I was sure that
we would make it up to each other again, but i wanted him
which was a little gritty at first.
OLD MAN A woman's mind is like the wind! A woman's language
as if it were poison!

OLD WOMAN That pretty white dress! I won't put it on but the
that one time. There was a trace of blood on him
the dance is over.

The music is sharpened. The young people stand out in their
two and two, Páid Ó Sé goes over to Nónín

**************

He extends his hand to her. She puts her hand in that hand.
They dance with each other along with the others. Waits
Pedar Mac Flanchadha in lealobh as he poisons two
eye in both of them. When the Fire is over
some of the young people separate from each other but Páid Ó keeps
He put his arm around Nónín's waist. Peter Mac goes
Flanched over to them.
PETER Will you dance with me, Daisy?

NÓINÍN I have promised this dance to Páid Ó Se, no blood, a
Pad?

PAID “Yes, and the next dance after. (by Peter)
Now for you. You have received an answer. Go forth and find
Another party for yourself.

PETER Move her, you spies, or you'll be the worst.

Nice soft pap, nice soft, big man! Don't be the girl after
tell you she doesn't want to dance with you? Don't take it
with that response from her, as a man would?

PETER Get out of my way, digger.

He beats Pad. Both address a
together. Peter hits the other man and lays him down.
He jumps on him and grabs him by the throat. Bounces
Daisy to them and Peter hits in the back with both hands.

NÓNÍN Go away, you bully. Move on, I tell you.

We only make him angrier. It increases on
his grip on the other man's throat.
ONE OF THE GIRLS He will kill him;

ONE OF THE BOYS Separate them or there will be a mess
there.

The two are separated from each other. Peter gets up and rubs
his hand is buried, but the other man remains stretched out on the ground.
Nónín throws herself on her knees beside him and lays
hand him.
NÓNÍN He's dead. You have it dead, Peter Mac
Evacuated.

Two of the boys pick up the corpse and take it with them
**************


The rest leave slowly, Peter and Nómín stay at
look at each other. She turns her back on him and goes, right.
He goes off to the left. The lights are changed so that it happens
the light on the two old people about as a. was in the beginning.

OLD WOMAN You were a warm man, Peter Mack
Evacuated. You did not know what the strength was
in your two hands. Poor Páid Ó Sé died in the evening
read that at the crossroads.
The old man is fidgeting in his chair. He lets out a sigh.

hmm
OLD WOMAN You were sentenced to ten years in prison
that day's work. Ten long years.

OLD MAN (Between sleeping and waking) Long years! Years
long!

OLD WOMAN He was bent gray when he was released.
He was seen at the fair after he came out of the
prison. He just hit his head about it
and arrested me without speaking to me, without greeting me.

OLD MAN Long years! Long years!

OLD WOMAN Married soon after. Peter did not see Mac
from Flanchadha ever since. Heard that he married and that
he had children. I had children myself. He himself was a
a good one for me, but he was not loved about it as a
I loved Peter MacFlanchadha. Peter Mac
Evacuated. Peter MacFlanchadha the unfortunate.

Banllra 1 enters. The old man snaps the pipe off
his mouth and puts it in his pocket.

NURSE 1 How has my boyfriend been since then? Did he
a good sleeping dress for himself?

OLD MAN Didn't do, didn't sleep. No one could
to sleep in this place that has a glow and
of gibberish there.
NURSE 1 (fixing the juice on him) Aren't you my pet!
OLD MAN (rubbing his hand on the nurse's wrist) Daisy
Not Khashoggi! Little Daisy Ní Chathasaigh!
OLD WOMAN Who is that calling me by my name?

**************
OLD MAN (lovingly stroking the nurse's hand) Daisy
Not Khashoggi. Little Nínín Ní Chathasaigh.

NURSE 1 Now, now, paws down. (She gives a light blow
by his hand.) “You and your Nóinín Ní Chathasaigh!
(She turns the chair and faces right.)
We will give you a ride around the garden and
over again. You must then enter the house and
make a sleeping dress.
The old woman takes on the nurse's apron while she is at
get over.

OLD WOMAN Who is that? Who is that talking to you?

NURSE 1 Now, now, don't start. Move off me and be you
good girl

OLD WOMAN Tell me who is that man in the chair.

BANALTRA 1 (she laughs softly) Look at that now. My
a pretty young girl still interested in men!

OLD WOMAN [tell me, please, who is that man.

BANALTRA 1 My name and surname is Pedar Mac Flannchadha
him. Now, "were happy or you wanted to
I would make a relationship between you? (we. she another scholar
laugh and thrust the chair before them £o mear.) Hup, a
horses! We will have a race, around the garden and
over again.

She and the old man in the chair disappear.

OLD WOMAN Peter MacFlancadha. Peter black Mac
Fleeing, it is. He married another woman. Was born
children of his wife. But see that a woman's name is not a name
any of his children who are now in his mouth, at the end of a
life for him, but my name, the name of Nóinín Ní Chathasaigh.
Nínín bheag Ní Chathasaigh, as I was called in
always.
Nurse 2 arrives. Are you talking to yourself? And the tears are yours
eyes. Oh, watch! You should not cry on a yellow day
May like this. You are not lonely


**************
(She removes the old woman's hair and puts a white ferg shawl on it
her head.) Now, you look as pretty and peacocky as a bride.
Nurse I rushes in. Pushing the old man's chair
before her. They both laugh.

NURSING I We had a great race. Around the garden and
over again.

OLD MAN I won the race. Misc was at the beginning.

BANALTRA 1 You won, without a doubt. Isn't that great
you are a hero! 'You smell strongly of tobacco. If not
knowing your pipe to be inside the house, I would say that
smoking his bis. (She rubs a handkerchief over his mouth)
Now for you, you are a nice clean boy.

OLD MAN (taking the nurse's hand away) Nóinín Ní
Catharsis. Little Nínín Ní Chathasaigh.

NURSE 1 You're grateful to me now, aren't you? (Read the
another nurse) When he has a stench every one
He cursed me, and when he is grateful
of me, he calls me Nóinín Ní Chathasaigh, whatever she is.

BANALTRA 2 Some girl he was in love with a long time ago, probably.

BANALTRA 1 It is likely, the poor wretch. (With the old man)
Now, boy, you must go into the house, and
if you're good, I might give a gal
of the pipe for you later.

OLD MAN Nóinín Ní Chathasaigh. Little daisy No
Catharsis.

NURSE 1. Here you are now, you and your deaf coach. (receives
they.)

NURSE 2. (To the woman) You can go in with him,
his girlfriend. You are tired, I think. And they are not
somehow alone. You miss you, instead of you
be cheerfully happy after the time you've had in the past
garden. Yes, now, motion to road.
She drives the old lady's chair in the house,

FLAG